this episode is supported by hover hi
I'm Kerri and welcome to crash course
computer science computers in the 40s
and early 50s ran one program at a time
a programmer would write one at their
desk for example on punch cards then
they'd carry it to a room containing a
room sized computer and hand it to a
dedicated computer operator that person
would then feed the programming to the
computer when it was next available the
computer would run it spit out some
output and haul this very manual process
worked okay back when computers were
slow and running a program often took
hours days or even weeks but as we
discussed last episode computers became
faster and faster and faster
exponentially so pretty soon having
humans run around inserting programs
into readers was taking longer than
running the actual programs themselves
we needed a way for computer to operate
themselves and so operating systems were
born
[Music]
operating systems or OSS for short are
just programs but special privileges on
the hardware and let them run and manage
other programs they're typically the
first ones have start when a computer is
turned on and all subsequent programs
are launched by the OS they got their
start in the 1950s as computers became
more widespread and more powerful the
very first OS is augmented the mundane
manual tasks of loading programs by hand
instead of being given one program at a
time computers could be given batches
when the computer was done with one it
would automatically a near instantly
start the next there was no downtime
while some one scurried around an office
to find the next program to run this was
called batch processing while computers
got faster they also got cheaper so they
were popping up all over the world
especially in universities and
government offices soon people started
sharing software but there was a problem
in the era of one-off computers like the
Harvard mark 1 or ENIAC programmers only
had to write code for that one single
machine the process of punch card
readers and Printers were known and
unchanging but there's computers became
more widespread their configurations
were not always identical like computers
might have the same CPU but not the same
printer this was a huge pain for
programmers not only did they have to
worry about writing their program but
also how to interface with each and
every model of printer and all devices
connected to a computer what are called
peripherals interfacing with early
peripherals with very low level
requiring programmers to know intimate
Hardware details about each device on
top of that program has rarely had
access to every model of peripheral to
test their code on so they had to write
code as best they could often just by
reading manuals and hope it works when
shared things weren't exactly
plug-and-play back then more
plug-and-play this was clearly terrible
so to make it easier for programmers
operating systems were implemented as
intermediaries between software programs
and hardware peripherals more
specifically they provided a software
abstraction through AP is called device
drivers these allow programmers to talk
to common input and output hardware or
i/o for short using standardized
mechanisms for example programmers could
call a function like print high school
and the OS would do the heavy lifting to
get it onto paper by the end of the
1950s computers has gotten so fast they
were often idle waiting for slow
mechanical things like printers and
punch card readers while programs
blocks on I out the expensive processor
was just chillin not like a villain you
know just relaxing in the late 50s the
University of Manchester in the UK
started work on a supercomputer called
Atlas one of the first in the world they
knew it was going to be wicked fast so
they needed a way to make maximal use of
the expensive machine their solution was
a program called the Atlas supervisor
finished in 1962 this operating system
not only loaded programs automatically
like earlier batch systems but could
also run several at the same time on its
single CPU it did this through clever
scheduling there so we have a game
program running on Atlas and we call the
function print high school which
instructs Atlas to print the value of a
variable named high school onto paper to
show our friends that we're the ultimate
champion of virtual tiddlywinks that
function core is going to take while the
equivalent of thousands of clock cycles
because mechanical printers are slow in
comparison to electronic CPUs so instead
of waiting for the i/o to finish Atlas
instead puts our program to sleep then
select from runs another program that's
waiting and ready to run eventually the
printer will report back to outlets that
it finished printing the value of high
score Atlas then marks our program is
ready to go and at some point it will be
scheduled to run again on the CPU and
continue on to the next line of code
following the print statement in this
way Atlas could have one program running
calculations on the CPU while another
was printing out data and yet another
reading in data from a punch tape
Alice's engineers double down on this
idea and outfitted their computer with
four paper tape readers four paper tape
crunches and up to eight magnetic tape
drives this allowed many programs to be
in progress
all at once sharing time on a single CPU
this ability enables by the operating
system is called multitasking there's
one big catch to having many programs
running simultaneously on a single
computer though each one is going to
need some memory and we can't leave that
programs data when we switch to another
program the solution is to allocate each
program its own block of memory so for
example let's say a computer has 10,000
memory locations in total program a when
I get allocated memory addressing 0
through 999 and program B might get
1,000 through 1999 and so on
if a program asks for more memory the
operating system decides if it can grab
that request and if so what memory block
to allocate next this flexibility is
great the introduces a quirk
that program a could end up being
allocated non-sequential blocks of
memory in say addresses zero through
nine hundred ninety nine and two
thousand through two thousand nine
hundred and ninety nine and this is just
a simple example a real program might be
allocated dozens of blocks scattered all
over memory as you might imagine this
would get really confusing for
programmers to keep track of
maybe there's a long list of sales data
in memory that a program has to total up
at the end of the day this list is
stored across a bunch of different
blocks of memory to hide this complexity
operating systems virtualized memory
locations revert your memory programs
consume their memory always starts at
address zero keeping things simple and
consistent however the actual physical
location in computer memory is hidden
and extracted by the operating system
just a new level of abstraction let's
take our example program B which has
been allocated a block of memory from
address 1000 to 1999 as far as program B
can tell this appears to be a block from
0 to 999 the OS and CPU handle the
virtual to physical memory remapping
automatically so if program B requests
memory location 42 it really ends up
reading address 1042 this virtualization
of memory addresses is even more useful
for program a which in our example has
been allocated to blocks of memory that
are separated from one another
this too is invisible to program a as
far as it can tell it's been allocated a
continuous block of two thousand
addresses when program a read memory
address 999 that does coincidentally map
to physical memory address 999 but if
program a reads the very next value in
memory at address one thousand that gets
mapped behind the scenes the physical
memory address two thousand this
mechanism allows programs have flexible
memory sizes called dynamic memory
allocation that appear to be continuous
to them it simplifies everything and
offers tremendous flexibility to the
operating system in running multiple
programs simultaneously another upside
of allocating each program its own
memory is that they're better isolated
from one another so if a buggy program
goes awry and starts writing
gobbledygook it can only trash its own
memory not that of other programs this
feature is called memory protection this
is also really useful in protecting
against malicious software like wire
says for example we generally don't want
other programs to have the ability to
read or modify the memory of let's say
our email with that kind of access
malware could send emails on your behalf
and maybe steal personal information not
good
Atlas had both virtual and protected
memory it was the first computer and OS
to support these features by the 1970s
computers were sufficiently fast and
cheap institutions like a university
could buy a computer and let students
use it it was not only fast enough to
run several programs at once but also
give several use of simultaneous
interactive access this was done through
a terminal which is the keyboard and
screen that connects to a big computer
but doesn't contain any processing power
itself a refrigerator-sized computer
might have 50 terminals connected to it
allowing up to 15 users now operating
systems has handled not just multiple
programs but also multiple users so that
no one person could gobble up all of the
computers resources operating systems
were developed that offered time sharing
with time sharing each individual user
was only allowed to utilize a small
fraction of the computer's processor
memory and so on because computers are
so fast even getting just 154 of its
resources was enough for individuals to
complete many tasks the most influential
of early time sharing operating systems
was multics or multiplex information and
computing service released in 1969
multics was the first major operating
system designed to be secure from the
outset developers didn't want
mischievous users accessing data they
shouldn't like students attempting to
access their final exam on their
professor's account features like this
meant multix was really complicated for
its time using around one megabit of
memory which was a lot back then that
might be half of a computer's memory
just to run the OS Dennis Ritchie one of
the researchers working on multix once
said one of the obvious things that went
wrong with mul 6 as a commercial success
was just an it was sort of over
engineered in a sense there was just too
much in it this led Dennis and another
multics researcher Ken Thompson to
strike out on their own and build a new
lean operating system called Unix they
wanted to separate the OS into two parts
first was the core functionality of the
OS things like memory management
multitasking and dealing with i/o which
is called the kernel the second part was
a wide array of useful tools that came
bundled with but not part of the kernel
things like programs and libraries
building a compact link
intentionally leaving some functionality
out Tom Van Vleck another multix
developer record I remarked to Dennis
that easily half of the code I was
writing multix was error recovery code
he said we left all that stuff out of
Unix if there's an error we have this
routine called panic and when it is
called with machine crashes and you
hollered down the hall hey reboot it you
might have heard of kernel panics this
is where the term came from it's
literally when the kernel crashes has no
recourse to recover and so calls a
function called panic originally all it
did was print the word panic and then
enter an infinite loop this simplicity
meant that UNIX could be run on cheaper
and more diverse Hardware making it
popular inside Bell Labs where Dennis
and Ken worked as more developers
started using UNIX to build and run
their own programs the number of
contributed tools group soon after its
release in 1971 it gained compilers for
different programming languages and even
a word processor quickly making it one
of the most popular OSS of the 1970s and
80s at the same time by the early 1980s
the cost of a basic computer had fallen
to the point where individual people
could afford one called a personal or
home computer these were much simpler
than the big mainframes found at
universities corporations and
governments so their operating systems
had to be equally simple for example
Microsoft's disk operating system or
ms-dos was just 160 kilobytes allowing
it to fit as the name suggests onto a
single disk first released in 1981 it
became the most popular OS for early
home computers even though it lacked
features like multitasking and protected
memory this meant that programs could
and would regularly crash the system
while annoying it was an acceptable
trade-off as users could just turn their
own computers off and on again even
early versions of Windows first released
by Microsoft in 1985 and which dominated
the OS scene throughout the 1990s let
strong memory protection when programs
misbehave you could get the blue screen
of death a sign that a program had
crashed so badly that it took down the
whole operating system
luckily newer versions of Windows have
better protections and usually don't
crash that often today computers run
modern operating systems like Mac OS X
Windows 10 minutes
iOS and Android even though the
computers we own are most often used by
just a single person you their OS is all
have multitasking and virtual and
protected memory so they can run many
programs at once
you can watch YouTube in your web
browser edit a photo in Photoshop play
music and spotify and sync dropbox all
at the same time this wouldn't be
possible without those decades of
research and development on operating
systems and of course the proper memory
to store those programs which we'll get
to next week I'd like to thank hover for
sponsoring this episode
hover is a service that helps you buy
and manage domain names hover has over
400 domain extensions to enter domain
with including calm and dotnet you can
also get unique domains that are more
professional than a generic address here
at crash course we'd get the domain name
Mongols dot fans but I think you know
that already
once you have your domain you can set up
your custom email to forwards your
existing email address including Outlook
or Gmail or whatever you already use
recover you can get a custom domain and
email address for 10% off go to Hamid
Khan flash crash course today to create
your custom domain and help support our
show crash course computer science is
produced in association with PBS Digital
Studios at their channel you can check
out a playlist of shows like brain craft
community and PBS infinite series this
episode was filmed at the chad and
stacey emigholz studio in indianapolis
indiana and it was made with the help of
all these nice people and our wonderful
graphics team is thought cafe thanks for
the random access memories I'll see you
next time
you
[Music]